so let me ask you another question here
why don't you flesh out for us a little
bit based on your experience in the lab
and otherwise um the the nature of
narcissism exactly what you've been
studying what are these people like and
how do you identify them yeah I mean
it's it's a little complicated because
the term
narcissism um we think about it as both
a personality trait you know an
individual difference and what we mean
by a trait is somebody's you know
thoughts feelings and behavor avors are
consistent across time and situation so
somebody acts the way in one situation
they act the way in another situation
they'll probably act the same way in six
months and in terms of
narcissism um we find that in the
personality uh world there's sort of two
different flavors or two different forms
of
narcissism what most of us are talking
about is this more grandiose form this
you know as you said disagreeable
extroverts so people that are
self-centered
uh have a sense of superiority have a
sense of entitlement but are also
assertive agentic maybe charismatic
extroverted driven um so that
combination of
grandiosity is what you see in your
classic ex-boyfriend your politician
your celebrity that's that
profile and then there's the more
vulnerable form of narcissism which
people don't talk about as much where
you have that antagonism
but you also have things like Envy comes
out a lot more with vulnerable
narcissism and you see a lot of Envy
right now and then you also get a lot of
neuroticism so people who are vulnerable
narcissists appear more uh they might
appear depressed or anxious and then you
kind of get to know them and you're like
wait you're kind of self-centered too
you kind of think people don't so
they're kind of the more passive
narcissists now is that is that the axis
okay so is the fundamental axis of
discrimination there trait neuroticism
like if you take your extroverted
disagreeable unconscientious person
let's say so the real kind of narcissist
that's bordering on psychopathy and then
you break them into two types you'd have
the low neuroticism Fearless movie uh
villain type of implacable predatory
narcissist but then you could flip that
and you could say well what about the
people who are really high in
neuroticism well they can be just as
narcissistic as you pointed out but
they're going to be depressed and
anxious claim victimization they're
going to use their suffering as a means
of manipulating people like is it
neuroticism that's the distinguisher
between vulnerable and grandiose
narcissism the neuroticism and also
you'll see lower extraversion with more
vulnerable narcissism so the
extraversion won't be as high and the
neuroticism will be higher so it's
driven more it's more it's more of a
defensive structure I don't want people
to criticize it's you know sometimes
called thin skin narcissism I'm looking
for people trying to criticize me
whereas people are more grandiose are
like I'm looking for an opportunity to
shine hey there's a there's a camera you
know here's a microphone awesome um so
it's a little different it's like
approach versus avoidance orientation
and of course some people have
characteristics of both um but those
that that's the main distinction that
we've seen in the literature and that
took about 20 years to sort out it
sounds crazy but because of the history
because what happened historically is
the clinicians who were seeing
narcissism were often seeing more
vulnerability the people who were
studying narcissism in the world of
leadership we're seeing much more
grandiosity sort of like studying
criminals or the criminal people or they
in the OR in criminality they's seen
more
grandiosity um and so you ended up with
sort of two theories coming
together and then on and then there's
the issue of what's a personality
disorder and that's typ when you take
that narcissism and it in a narcissistic
personality disorder is grandiose but
also has elements of vulnerability in it
and you make it extreme and then
inflexible so one of the Challen you
know if I'm narcissistic on stage that's
fine but if I go home and I'm that way
with my kids I'm that way with my wife
I'm going to have problems so when your
personality becomes
inflexible uh then you get the
impairment you ruin your relationships
you you you take too big of risks at
work you're too self-centered to learn
from your mistakes so you're
overconfident you make Bad Business
decisions uh whatever the case is you
have that sort of impairment and that's
where you start talking about a
personality
disorder people with a personality
disorder that it's the extreme
narcissism sometimes there's some trauma
something going on in childhood that
maybe makes it more fixed but generally
it's just the extreme with
impairment um and then people have
noticed some other kinds of narcissism
sometimes people talk about communal
narcissism which are people that take uh
the enhancements more like I'm the best
friend ever um I'm the most moral person
ever so it's a more moralistic face on
narcissism sometimes in the clinical
World they'll talk about malignant
narcissism as a specifier so it's I'm
narcissistic but I'm also sort of
sadistic and pathological and mean so
there's that that kind of Darker face of
narcissism so you can move this around
in different ways but typically it's
that combination of you know that
disagreeable extrovert personality and
then what you're doing is that
self-regulation is about gaining
positive attention and avoiding negative
attention so gaining attention gaining
status gaining
power America's Health Care system is
lacking in any real care insurance
companies regularly deny Progressive
treatment options primary care
physicians refuse to order comprehensive
lab work and the standards of care lag
years behind the leading research that's
where meric health comes in mer Health
represents a paradigm shift in how we
approach medicine the Premier Health
optimization platform meric Health
empowers you to maximize your longevity
and performance with a confidence that
comes from having experts in your back
pocket they offer cuttingedge diagnostic
Labs concierge Health coaching and
expert clinical oversite they help you
achieve your health and fitness goals by
leveraging datadriven lifestyle and
nutrition recommendations along with
supplement and prescription treatment
options if you're listening to this show
then you're probably a proponent of
taking your health into your own hands
that's why we've teamed up with mer
Health to offer a turnkey optimization
package designed for those who want to
maximize their performance and Longevity
with the most elaborate testing on the
market you'll receive extensive lab work
thorough lab reports video calls with
Merck's Health experts and expedited
onboarding go to mer health.com Peterson
and use code Peterson to get the same
panel and medical oversight get and save
10% at checkout that's mer health.com
Peterson and use cod Peterson
checkout yeah yeah okay so so well we
should also point out something that's
that's worth thinking about for people
too with regards to being self centered
you know it's it's it's kind of an odd
linguistic formulation and there's an
inaccuracy in it that's actually
dangerous because the narcissists aren't
so much self-centered
as they are whim centered right and that
that goes along with the immaturity
because if you were treating yourself
properly you're playing the long game
you're trying to regulate your social
relationships your your marriage your
your relationship with your children
you're not going to be selfish but that
what that means more specifically more
more more precisely is that you're not
going to sacrifice the future or other
people around you to the immediate
gratification of your motivational or
emotional states right and so the self
it's that because the the narcissistic
type isn't exactly selfish not in a
productive way because they're they're
they don't do well across time what they
are are prisoners of their own whims and
that speaks to the immaturity as well
because like a 2-year-old is a creature
of whim I mean there's a developmental
trajectory
towards exploration and integration but
fundamentally 2-year-olds aren't social
and they want what they want right now
or it's tantrum time and and kids are
more or less like that some are very
tantrum prone and some much less so but
that's still part and parcel being a
two-year-old but that that selfishness
that goes along with narcissism isn't
really care for yourself it's
subjugation to your own immature whims
right it's just not a produ it's not
like the narcissist's benefit not really
I I like that you're pushing back on
that term because you're you're
correcting that that it isn't
self-centered like you know what I
really care about myself and what's best
for me in the next 20 years and I have a
vision and I'm pursuing that Vision
aggressively it's like oh here's an
opportunity for status I'm going to take
it oh there's a cute woman my wife's not
going to find out about this it's much
more hedonistic it's much more immediate
action which is why when we were talking
about conscientiousness as being a
buffer to this I mean that's why it's
important um as I usually tell my
students uh Hedonism is a terrible way
to be happy if you do what makes you
happy in the moment all the time you're
guaranteed to be depressed and ruin your
life I mean so yes this by self-centered
it's much more whim centered it might be
that the Cardinal elements of of
narcissism are disagreeableness let's
say extraversion low conscientiousness
when it gets really pathological but
that that shortterm Orient short-term
pleasure orientation is a crucial
element of it I think right and that
would be the hedonistic element and I
don't think you get really you certainly
don't get the malignant narcissistic or
the criminal narcissistic type without
including that Hedonism and that would
be something like short-term mating
strategy uh live for the day Hedonism
that's that's part parcel of that and I
do think that that's really equivalent
to something like lack of cortical
maturation right because it's the
default condition of the typical
2-year-old but now there's another
element of this that's cool too so you
know in the uh linguistic analysis that
established the big five there were all
sorts of trait descriptors of negative
emotion that loaded powerfully on
neuroticism right one of those this is
so cool is
self-consciousness which is actually a
fast in the Neo system and this is
something that's also extremely worth
thinking about relationship to
selfishness because you might think well
I'm concerned with myself and that's
going to make me happy it's like no
self-consciousness is indistinguishable
from negative emotion and so it's so
interesting a because what it implies is
that it isn't that there's a causal
connection between being obsessed with
yourself and being miserable it's that
they're actually the same thing
[Music]